# Predicting data for the suspended 2019-20 NBA season


## Abstract

The COVID-19 pandemic has affected our society in various ways and has changed numerous events on schedule for 2020. One such event that we were looking forward to was the end of the 2019-20 NBA season as well as the 2020 NBA Playoffs. Since a large portion of the 2019-20 NBA regular season games have already been played, we utilized the data collected from these games to run regression prediction models and calculate Elo ratings for each team in order to predict the standings for 2019-20 as well as the matchups and results of the Playoffs and the NBA season awards. Using the Elo rating predictions by matchup, we predicted that the Milwaukee Bucks ended with the highest seeding (standing) at the end of the season with the Los Angeles Lakers coming in second. Running our analysis by predicting the 7-game playoff series matchups, we predicted that the Western Conference Finals matchup will be between the #1 seed Los Angeles Lakers and the #2 seed Los Angeles Clippers and the Eastern Conference Finals matchup will be between the #1 seed Milwaukee Bucks and the #2 seed Toronto Raptors. We found that running these simulations predicts the NBA Finals matchup between the Los Angeles Lakers and the Milwaukee Bucks with the Los Angeles Lakers ultimately claiming the Larry O'Brien NBA Championship Trophy. Additionally, we used several types of regression models to best predict end-of-season statistics for every player. We ultimately used a logistic regression model to predict the end-of-season statistics and leaders for each of the major categories and found that our predictions indicate that Giannis Antetokounmpo will claim both the NBA Most Valuable Player (MVP) award as well as the Defensive Player of the Year (DPOY) award. According to our prediction model, this will mark only the third time in NBA history that a player will win MVP and DPOY in the same season with the previous two players being basketball legends Michael Jordan and Hakeem Olajuwon.


Our analysis was based on calculating Elo ratings for each team. To learn more about the Elo rating system, click [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elo_rating_system).

**Finally, to learn more about our findings and conclusions about the 2019-20 NBA season, you can view our [full report](https://github.com/RSaravanan17/nba-suspended-season-predictions/blob/master/report.Rmd).**